# SumoBot-2026
Hands-on robotics project focused on designing, building, and coding a competitive SumoBot. The robot is built entirely out of wood and powered by an ESP32, with all control logic developed using the Arduino IDE. This repository documents the full engineering process, from mechanical design &amp; electronics integration to embedded software &amp; testing.

# For future engineers/hobbyists
We are writing this because we also checked out different github repositories for sumobot code and just ideas in general. Use our code as a base, rather than a final algorithm. Use our CAD model for ideas rather than copying it. We have outlined the flaws with our code that we noticed during the competition, and there are probably other flaws we haven't accounted for. Build LOTS of prototypes. We made the mistake of building only two prototypes, which led to a multitude of issues with our final robot. Adding onto that, test against other sumobots. If you know other teams in the tournament, ask them for practice runs. If not, just head to the nearest workshop (our university has one in a library) and look for other people building their robots. This will give you lots of data before the actual competition, and will allow you to get a polished final robot. Also, if you are doing this competition in a team, make sure you all are on the same page. We weren't on the same page due to circumstances out of our control, which caused a lot of unnecessary stress for the team as a whole. Last but not least, don't forget to have fun! Go for crazy ideas and be creative, even if it's not optimal. If you want to be optimal, just get insanely fast motors and focus completely on the algorithm, but that's boring. Being creative makes this more of a make it real type project rather than win at all costs type project. The route you want to take depends on your decision. Anyways, that's probably the biggest takeaways from this competition. Check out the improvements section of if you're interested with the things that went wrong with our robot. Maybe read the engineering process (though that's probably the most boring part, as it's just a summary of what we did). 

# Engineering Process
Firstly, we covered the electrical components. Why? It's because one of our group members had a good amount of experience with electrical components, so he just knocked it out of the way. We decided to source most of our parts from AliExpress, since there was a budget limit of $100 on this competition. The club's kit used an arduino nano, which is like $40 or something crazy on it's own. We decided on an esp8266 because we had one and it costs like $2. Originally, we were thinking about designing our own dual motor H-bridge, but we found one online (TB6612FNG) that sufficed for our expectations. For the motors, we decided to go for a slower, more torque heavy motor, and we ended up with a 200 RPM N20 motor. This is because we were aware that there will be faster robots in this competition, and we didn't want to go so slow that we couldn't compete with the speed demons. We were also originally planning to go with a 4 wheeled design, which is a lot stronger if we think only electrically. However, due to the 500g weight limit, the 4 motors would produce virtually the same force as 2 motors. This is because there is less traction on each motor due to the weight being split evenly (NOTE: Everything we've said in the last sentence could be wrong, the only real way to be sure is to actually build both 4 wheeled and 2 wheels designs and test them). We decided on using the two extra motors as wedge lifters, to pick up robots and reduce their traction. 

Then we looked at the mechanical design. This part took so long compared to the electrical design, mainly because we were inexperienced with integrating electrical parts into something physical. What didn't help was that some parts had quirks. The ultrasonic sensor can't detect anything right up against it, so it had to be a couple of centimeters back. The IR sensor needed to detect the boundary before the whole robot went over, so it had to be in the front. The battery had to be as low as possible so we can lower the center of gravity. The wedge had to have some cuts in it to make space for our wedge motors. There were so many factors that it took us 3 weeks to get something that looked like it would work. We decided on building a PLA robot and a wood robot, while prioritizing the wood robot due to it's strength and weight. 

While we were doing the mechanical design, we also started on the software side of things. We made the base code and tested it, with everything working decently well. We didn't make a replica of the ring that the sumobot competition would use, which ended up causing a lot more problems later down the line. We focused more on making sure everything functioned, rather than making sure it would thrive in competition due to our very limited arduino experience.   

We didn't do much effective testing for our sumobot. This is because we were struggling to make our robot even function, much less than making sure it thrives in competition. In hindsight, this is what killed our sumobot in competition. The lack of prototypes and testing made it so a lot of issues and quirks made it into our final design. 

# Improvements

There are multiple improvements to be made to our robot. Firstly, our wedge design wasn't ideal. Initially, we wanted to use an additional pair of motors as a wedge lifter, but it wasn't functioning the day before the competition so we pivoted. We were also using wood, which made it really hard to get a precise and effective wedge shape. It is possible with skill in woodworking, but it would be way easier to make everything but the front side out of wood. Secondly, our code had some flaws. Our edge detection code was imperfect, which you can see in some of our rounds. This can be fixed by simply slowing our robot down, however, we wanted to utilize all of the torque in our motors in pushing matches. We tried to code a close distance mode and a far distance mode, but due to issues with edge detection, we weren't able to pull it off. The placement of our IR sensor didn't help. It was placed in the middle of our robot, which gave us less time to stop our sumobot when it reached the edge. This combined with momentum was a recipe for bad edge detection. A lot of our problems here could be solved by slowing our robot down, and having an additional IR sensor at the front to detect the enemy robot (and then ignore everything else except pushing). 

The third thing we could've improved is adding weight to our robot. Due to our robot not working until the last minute, we completely skipped adding additional weight to our robot. As a result, our robot weighed 230 grams in a 500 gram weight class. This caused us a lot of issues, and we could've won two more matches if we simply added coins below the back of the chassis. The fourth thing we could've improved was adding another navigation sensor on the sides to help with detection. This makes the code more complex, but in very competitive matches, it is worth it. Adding a sensor (or button) on the backside would also improve the robot's defenses quite a bit. Lastly, we could've implemented the wedge motors and code. Since the competition was next day, and our wedge motors would not work electrically, we decided to take out what didn't work and focus on what did work. Having wedge motors along with a better wedge shape would make a solid robot, but the wiring is very complex and messy (at least for our skill level).  
